[Page 39]
<•>
	/ Acute Pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis is a common
cause of admission for acute
abdominal pain, the most com-
mon aetiologies for pancreatitis
being migration of gallstones and
alcohol use.  Other aetiologies may
include iatrogenic instrumentation
of the ampulla of Vater, neoplastic
obstruction of the main pancreatic
duct, or ductal injury with extrav-
asation of pancreatic juice in the
context or blunt abdominal trauma.
<!> ATTENTION
Acute pancreatitis in adults can be classified according to the
revised Atlanta classification. From a clinical point of view
the severity of acute pancreatitis may be graded as mild (no
local or systemic complications); moderately severe (local or
systemic complications but without organ failure) and severe
(including persistent organ failure).
Regarding local complications it is important to distinguish
the more self-limited, interstitial oedematous form of acute
pancreatitis from the necrotising form, which occurs in
≤10% but has a much higher morbidity and mortality. Patients
with necrotising pancreatitis are often in a critical clinical state
and require intensive care. This may cause some limitations to
the use diagnostic imaging modalities from a logistic point of
view (patient transfer, monitoring, collaboration, etc).
Local complications of severe acute pancreatitis include
the formation of large or infected fluid collections which
may compress adjacent abdominal organs or become
superinfected, with the risk of sepsis and extensive
retroperitoneal fat necrosis.  Vascular complications include
thrombosis of major peripancreatic vessels and formation of
arterial pseudoaneurysms with the risk of severe acute intra-
abdominal haemorrhage.

[Page 40]
<•>
/	 Imaging in Acute
Pancreatitis
	/ Imaging in Acute Pancreatitis
The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis at emer-
gency admission is usually based on clinical
symptoms and laboratory findings.  Since
cholelithiasis is the most common cause
of acute pancreatitis, US is indispensable
and should be performed in all patients
with suspected acute pancreatitis. How-
ever, contrast-enhanced CT is the imaging
method of choice for further characterisa-
tion of acute pancreatitis and detection of
local complications. If the diagnosis can be
established clinically, patients with mild pan-
creatitis may not require CT imaging at the
time of admission. However, acute pancre-
atitis is an evolving, dynamic condition which
may change in severity over time. In moder-
ately severe and severe acute pancreatitis
follow–up CT imaging is, therefore, often
required to assess the course of the disease
and detect developing complications.
<!> ATTENTION
According to the revised Atlanta classification,
imaging has a key role in distinguishing between
acute interstitial oedematous pancreatitis in
which contrast enhancement of the gland on
CT is intact and where key diagnostic findings
may include diffuse or focal swelling of the gland,
infiltration of the peripancreatic fat and acute
peripancreatic fluid collections or pseudocysts
(of homogeneous liquid content) from acute
necrotising pancreatitis in which variable portions
of the parenchyma lack contrast enhancement
on CT  and where key diagnostic findings may
include solitary or multiple intra- or peripancreatic
necrotic collections or walled- of necrotic areas
with heterogeneous liquid/non-liquid content.
The non-liquid content of these lesion is more
conspicuous on US and MRI than on CT.
MRI may be used as an alternative to CT if
iv. injection of  iodinated contrast material is
contraindicated. MRCP is the method of
choice for non-invasive delineation of ductal
anomalies. Unlike CT, however, MRI is not always
possible in severely ill patients who cannot
cooperate and who are equipped with electronic
and ferromagnetic accessory devices that are
incompatible with use in the magnetic field.

[Page 41]
<•>
/	 Imaging in Acute
Pancreatitis
CT (portal phase) showing oedematous acute pancreatitis. Glandular
swelling, moderate infiltration of peripancreatic fat (arrows) no major
peripancreatic fluid collections, homogeneous enhancement of gland.
CT (pancreatic phase) showing necrotising  acute pancreatitis.
Inhomogeneous, incomplete enhancement of the gland with non-enhancing
areas (arrows). Intra- and peri-pancreatic fluid collections (*) due to
haemorrhage and exudate.
>|< COMPARE
	/ Acute Oedematous vs. Acute Necrotising Pancreatitis
*

[Page 42]
<•>
/	 Local Complications
of Acute Pancreatitis
	/ Local Complications of Acute Pancreatitis
All of these collections  may cause clinical symp-
toms, either due to compression of the adjacent
common bile duct (jaundice) or gastrointestinal
tract (vomiting) or due to infection (sepsis).
The distinction between infected and noninfected
collections can often be made by image-guided per-
cutaneous fine needle aspiration. Although infected
pancreatic fluid collections can be drained externally
by percutaneous catheters under CT or US guidance,
minimally invasive treatment of established  pseudo-
cysts is preferably done by means of EUS-guided
internal drainage into the gastrointestinal tract.
Vascular complications of acute pancreati-
tis include thrombosis of major peripancreatic
arteries or veins and formation of arterial pseu-
doaneurysms, as well as acute haemorrhage.
Potential or active sources of arterial bleeding are
best treated with angiographic embolisation.
<!> ATTENTION
Fluid collections in interstitial oedematous
pancreatitis  can be distinguished according to
the  revised Atlanta classification as
non-encapsulated peripancreatic fluid
collections (in the first 4 weeks)
encapsulated peripancreatic or
remote fluid collections or well-defined
pseudocysts (after 4 weeks)
Fluid collections in necrotising pancreatitis
are defined as
acute necrotic collections (occurring in the
first 4 weeks) which are not encapsulated
and  contain heterogeneous non-liquefied
material, as opposed to
walled-off necrosis (developing after
4 weeks) in which collections are
encapsulated and contain heterogeneous
non-liquefied material

[Page 43]
/	 Local Complications
of Acute Pancreatitis
	/ Pancreatic and Peripancreatic Collections after Acute Oedematous
and Acute Necrotising Pancreatitis
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
Pancreatic pseudocyst (> 4 weeks). CT (portal phase) showing a large rounded
encapsulated collection 5 weeks after acute oedematous pancreatitis, corresponding
to a  pseudocyst (P) in the pancreatic tail. Pancreatic duct (arrows).
P
ANC
Acute necrotic collection (< 4 weeks). MRI (transverse T2-weighted
image) showing a large irregular-shaped acute necrotic pancreatic
collection (ANC) containing heterogeneous  debris due to haemorrhage
or exudate (arrows) 3 weeks after the onset of necrotising pancreatitis.

[Page 44]
/	 Local Complications
of Acute Pancreatitis
	/ Pancreatic and Peripancreatic Collections After Acute Necrotising
Pancreatitis
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
Acute necrotic collection (< 4weeks). CT (portal phase) shows a large
devascularised portion of the pancreatic body and formation of an acute
necrotic collection (X), thrombosis of the splenic vein (pink arrow) and fat
stranding of the anterior pararenal space (yellow arrows), 2 weeks after the
onset of acute necrotising pancreatitis
X
X
*
*
Walled-off necrotic collections (> 4weeks). CT (portal phase)  shows acute
walled-off pancreatic and peripancreatic necrotic collections (asterisks)
6 weeks after the onset of  acute necrotising pancreatitis. The collections have
a slightly enhancing defined wall of granulomatous tissue (arrows).

[Page 45]
/	 Local Complications
of Acute Pancreatitis
	/ Further Complications of Acute Pancreatitis
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
Pancreatic pseudocyst compressing the stomach. CT (portal phase)
showing a large rounded encapsulated collection 5 weeks after acute
oedematous pancreatitis, corresponding to a  pseudocyst (P) in the lesser sac,
compressing the stomach (S)
P
S
Thrombosis of splenic artery. Dynamic contrast-enhanced CT (arterial phase)
shows complete occlusion of the splenic artery with beginning collaterals
(arrows) complicating acute pancreatitis.

[Page 46]
<•>
/	 Image-Guided Fluid
Aspiration
	/ Image-Guided Fluid
Aspiration in Acute
Pancreatitis
<!> ATTENTION
Bacterial superinfection occurs commonly
in necrotising pancreatitis and carries a high
risk of abdominal sepsis. CT-guided fine-
needle aspiration allows for the diagnosis of
infection and specification of germs.
CT-guided fluid aspiration. Left image: CT (portal phase) showing free fluid (asterisks) in the presence of clinical signs of infection. Right image: CT-guided needle
placement within the fluid collection (yellow ellipse) for the diagnosis of infection and specification of germs.
*
*

[Page 47]
<•>
/	 Percutaneous
Drainage of
Complicated
Pancreatic Fluid
Collections
	/ Percutaneous Drainage of Complicated
Pancreatic Fluid Collections
CT-guided percutaneous drainage with an indwelling
pigtail catheter can be indicated as a temporary alter-
native to internal drainage during the first weeks in:
large or increasing collections (>5cm diameter)
symptomatic collections causing pain,
gastric or duodenal compression
infected collections
Image on the left
illustrates the
CT set-up for an
interventional
procedure with
the interventional
radiologist
targeting the area
to punction under
CT guidance.
Image on the right
illustrates the
correct position of
the pigtail catheter
(arrows) in the
infected pancreatic
collection (+).
Pigtail catheters

[Page 48]
/ Chronic
Pancreatitis
Blunt Traumaa

[Page 49]
<•>
	/ Chronic Pancreatitis
Chronic pancreatitis is
the result of a recurrent
inflammatory process
leading to fibrosis, cal-
cification, pseudocyst
formation and ductal
changes and eventu-
ally exocrine functional
insufficiency of the
pancreas. The aetiology
of chronic pancreatitis
is not fully understood
and includes idiopathic
but also toxic-metabolic
causes (e.g., chronic
alcohol consumption),
and congenital predispo-
sitions such as pancreas
divisum or pancreas
annulare, as well as
autoimmune diseases.
<!> ATTENTION
On cross-sectional imaging parenchymal changes include lack of perfusion due to fibrotic
changes in chronically inflamed areas, atrophy, calcifications and fluid collections.
Although these changes can be visualised on both CT and MRI, calcifications are better
visualised with CT. The morphologic changes of the pancreatic parenchyma in the context
of chronic pancreatitis may sometimes be very difficult to distinguish from pancreatic
adenocarcinoma, and even a negative image guided biopsy cannot reliably rule out
malignancy.
Ductal changes can be graded according to the Cambridge classification as equivocal,
mild, moderate or severe,  based on the extent of dilatation and stenosis, calculi and
pseudocysts.  Irregular calibre due to stenoses and dilated segments may appear as a
“string of beads”. Although the Cambridge classification was initially developed for ERCP,
ductal changes may also be delineated noninvasively by means of MRCP.
Dynamic evaluation with MRCP after secretin stimulation may be used in selected cases
to allows semi-quantitavie estimation of the exocrine secretory function and enhances
anatomic detail.
>•< FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
Para-duodenal or “groove”-pancreatitis is an uncommon focal form of chronic pancreati-
tis in the  space between the  duodenum and pancreas. Cross-sectional imaging shows
cystic thickening of the duodenal wall with or without duodenal stenosis. The fibrous
tissue within the pancreatico-duodenal groove may show late enhancement after contrast
administration. The inflammatory mass should not be confused with a neoplastic lesion.

[Page 50]
<•>
/	 Imaging Features
	/ Chronic Pancreatitis: Imaging Features
MRCP shows dilated main pancreatic duct with calculi
(yellow arrow) as well as compression of distal common
bile duct (pink arrows) .
MRCP shows stenosis of main pancreatic duct, which
has a “string of beads” appearance (yellow arrows) and
shows dilatation of its distal portion. Note also dilatation
of second order branches (pink arrows).
CT (pancreatic phase) shows pseudocyst of
pancreatic body (yellow arrow) and multiple
parenchymal calcifications (pink arrows).

[Page 51]
<•>
/	 Imaging Features
MRCP in a different patient shows a dilated main pancreatic duct and dilatations
of second order branches (arrowheads), as well as ductal calculi, which present
as filling defects (arrow).
Contrast-enhanced CT (pancreatic phase) shows calcified calculi (arrows)
within the dilated main pancreatic duct.
CT image courtesy: Oskar Bozek, MD, Department of
Radiodiagnostics and Invasive Radiology, Faculty of Medical
Sciences in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, Poland.

[Page 52]
<•>
/	 Imaging Features
	/ Chronic Pancreatitis: Dynamic MRCP with Secretin Stimulation
Selected frames (1-3) of a dynamic MRCP (coronal view) with secretin stimulation show stenosis and inflammatory irregularities of main pancreatic duct and secondary
ducts (arrows) in chronic pancreatitis. Note increasing secretion of pancreatic juice after iv. injection of secretin with improved visualisation of ductal detail and
progressive filling of the duodenum. Duodenum marked by asterisks. GB = gallbladder. RP = left renal pelvis. Left ureter (arrowhead).
RP
RP
RP
GB
GB
GB
*
*
*
*
*

[Page 53]
<•>
/	 Focal Chronic
Pancreatitis in
Pancreas Divisum
	/ Focal Chronic Pancreatitis of the Uncinate
Process in Pancreas Divisum
Multiphasic contrast-enhanced CT (pancreatic phase image on the left and portal phase image on the right) shows reduced enhancement and calcifications of the
uncinate process (yellow arrow) compared with the rest of the pancreas which is drained by Santorini’s duct (pink arrows) into the duodenum (D).
D
D
<!> ATTENTION
Although patients with pancreas divisum are usually asymptomatic, about
25% - 35% of these patients experience recurrent pancreatitis, which
may lead to the development of chronic pancreatitis.
Pancreas divisum can explain why chronic pancreatitis changes can be
limited to the lower part of the pancreatic head and uncinate process.

[Page 54]
/	 Focal Chronic
Pancreatitis in
Pancreas Divisum
MRCP showing normal duct of Santorini and main pancreatic duct (pink arrows). Dilated duct of Wirsung due to chronic pancreatitis in the uncinate process (yellow
arrow).
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
D

[Page 55]
/	 Paraduodenal
(“Groove-”)
Pancreatitis
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
MRI (T2-weighted, transverse image) shows cystic
thickening of the duodenal wall and cyst-like changes
within the paraduodenal groove (arrow).
MRCP shows a mass protruding into the
duodenal lumen due to thickening of the
duodenal wall (arrows). Common bile duct
(CBD); Pancreatic Duct (PD).
Contrast-enhanced CT (axial pancreatic phase image)
shows a hypodense zone (yellow arrow) between the
duodenum (D) and the pancreatic head (P). Note the
presence of gallbladder stones (pink arrow).
CBD
PD
D
P
	/ Paraduodenal (“Groove-”) Pancreatitis:
Imaging Features
Groove pancreatitis is a form of chronic inflam-
mation involving the anatomic space between
the duodenal wall and the pancreatic head.
Although it can have cystic components, it may
also appear as a mass and therefore, be diffi-
cult to distinguish from a malignant tumour.

[Page 56]
/	 Paraduodenal
(“Groove-”)
Pancreatitis
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
MRI (T2-weighted, transverse image) shows cystic thickening of the duodenal wall (arrow).
Resected specimen confirmed cystic and fibrotic changes due to chronic inflammation within the pancreatico-duodenal groove.

[Page 57]
/ Pancreatic
Neoplasms
Blunt Traumaa

[Page 58]
<•>
	/ Pancreatic Neoplasms
Ductal adenocarcinoma, a solid, tumour originat-
ing from the exocrine pancreatic tissue is by far
the most common tumour and is always malignant,
often with a serious prognosis at the time of the
diagnosis.  It is important, however, to distinguish
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma from adeno-
carcinoma of the ampulla of Vater which usually
has much more favourable prognosis if completely
resected, thus warranting a more aggressive ther-
apeutic approach even in elderly patients.
Pancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (PanNENs)
are much less common solid tumours originating from
the pancreatic islets. They can be functionally active
or inactive and can be either benign or malignant.
Cystic tumours of the pancreas have no sys-
temic functional activity. Although serous  mul-
ticystic tumours are benign, mucinous  cysta-
denoma and intraductal mucinous neoplasms
(IPMN) can undergo malignant transformation.
<!> ATTENTION
A wide variety of pancreatic neoplasms exists that
can be classified:
according to their functional origin as
exocrine and endocrine
according to their location as
intra- or extraductal
according to their tissular components
as solid or cystic
according to their behaviour as
benign or malignant

[Page 59]
<•>
/	 Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma
	/ Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma
Typical findings at CT or MRI consist of a solid
parenchymal mass with usually less enhancement
compared with the surrounding pancreatic tissue.
However, contrast behaviour may also sometimes
result in an isodense or hyperdense mass. Because
a common location is  in the pancreatic head, the
tumours may compress the common bile duct, lead-
ing to painless jaundice. Simultaneous compression
of the common bile duct and the main pancreatic
duct  may be seen on diagnostic imaging  studies
and has been termed as the “double duct sign”.
Imaging has an important role for the staging of pancre-
atic ductal adenocarcinoma, which is done according to
the “Tumour” “Node” “Metastasis” (TNM) classification
of the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) /
American Joint Cancer Committee (AJCC). Criteria for
primary tumour (T) staging are based on tumour size,
extension beyond the organ, and involvement of the
adjacent major arteries. Criteria for nodal (N) staging
are based on the number of regional lymph nodes that
are involved by malignancy. Imaging signs of advanced
disease include infiltration of the peripancreatic fat,
bile ducts, duodenum, or major pancreatic vessels,
enlarged locoregional lymph nodes, and metastases in
remote lymph nodes, liver, or other organs. Detection
of metastases in remote lymph nodes, liver or other
organs (M-staging) can be facilitated by PET/CT.
Pancreatic adenocarcinomas are often unre-
sectable for cure at the time of imaging diagno-
sis. Depending on the clinical situation, minimally
invasive palliative treatment including endoscopic
or percutaneous biliary stenting may be favoured
in advanced cases over attempts at major cura-
tive resection, which carries a high morbidity.

[Page 60]
<•>
/	 Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma
	/ Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma: Imaging Features
pancreatic phase
portal phase
Multiphasic contrast-
enhanced CT showing a solid
mass in the pancreatic head
(arrows), enhancing less than
the surrounding pancreatic
tissue. The tumour is limited
to the pancreatic head.
MRI (T1-weighted with Gd-enhancement) showing a solid
hypointense mass in the pancreatic body (arrows). Note
beginning dilatation of main duct (arrowhead)
<!> ATTENTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
typically enhances less than the
surrounding pancreatic tissue!

[Page 61]
Contrast-enhanced CT (curved reconstruction) shows an isodense solid mass involving the
pancreatic head and body (asterisk) and dilatation of the distal main pancreatic duct (arrowhead).
*
<•>
/	 Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma
M
CBD
PD
IHBD
MRCP shows dilated common bile duct (CBD) and main
pancreatic duct (PD) In a patient with painless jaundice (=
“double duct sign”). Note also dilatation of intrahepatic bile
ducts (IHBD)
>•< FURTHER KNOWLEDGE

[Page 62]
<•>
/	 Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma
Contrast-enhanced CT (pancreatic phase) shows a hypodense lesion of the
left portion of the pancreatic body and dilatation of the distal pancreatic duct
(arrows) in a patient with pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Same patient as in the image on the left. 18-FDG PET/CT shows increased
FDG uptake of the left portion of the pancreatic body (arrows).
<!> ATTENTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma often shows increased
glucose metabolism at PET/CT.
PET/CT is mostly used for the detection of distant
metastases (M-staging) rather than for locoregional
staging.  PET/CT has a limited value for the distinction
between tumour and inflammation.
<∞> REFERENCE
>
See also e-Book chapter

on Nuclear Medicine

[Page 63]
coronal PET/CT fused image
3D Volume Rendering PET/CT
coronal PET image
<•>
/	 Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma
18-FDG PET/CT of advanced pancreatic tumour after
palliative placement of biliary metallic endoprosthesis
(arrowheads) for obstructive jaundice. Increased
glucose metabolism of the tumour (arrows).
Note position of the tumour around the biliary
endoprosthesis.

[Page 64]
<•>
/	 Pancreatic Ductal
Adenocarcinoma
M
D
D
Abdominal CT (pancreatic phase). Large non-enhancing solid mass of the
pancreatic head and uncinate process (M), infiltrating the retroperitoneal fatty
tissue (arrows) indicating advanced disease (T3). D = duodenum.
Abdominal CT (arterial phase). The tumor infiltrates the celiac axis and the splenic
artery (arrows) indicating advanced disease (T4) and unresectability for cure.
<!> ATTENTION
By showing infiltration of the peripancreatic tissues and organs and of nearby
large vessels, cross-sectional imaging  provides important information regarding
advanced tumour manifestations indicating non-resectability for cure.
	/ Staging of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma

[Page 65]
/	 Ampullary
Adenocarcinoma
Contrast-enhanced CT shows poorly delineated mass lesion infiltrating
the ampulla of Vater and duodenum (arrows). D = duodenum, CDB =
common bile duct, P = pancreas
	/ Ampullary Adenocarcinoma
Ampullary adenocarcinomas often present at imaging
with a double duct sign. Large tumours may protrude
into the 2nd part of the duodenum; however, smaller
lesions may be entirely occult. Endoscopic biopsy is
the method of choice to distinguish between ampullary
carcinoma and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
D
D
P
D
axial image

[Page 66]
<•>
/	 Neuroendocrine
Neoplasms
(panNENs
	/ Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Neoplasms
(panNENs)
Among solid epithelial pancreatic tumours, pancre-
atic neuroendocrine neoplasms (panNENs) are
much less common than ductal adenocarcinoma.
The WHO classification distinguishes between
well- differentiated variants of neuroendocrine
tumours (panNETs), poorly differentiated variants or
neuroendocrine carcinomas (panNECs), and mixed
neuroendocrine/non-neuroendocrine neoplasms
(MiNENs). Well differentiated panNETs may be func-
tionally active, producing clinical symptoms according
to their cellular origin and peptide production, e.g.,
Insulinoma > hypoglycemia
Glucagonoma > glucose intolerance
Gastrinoma > Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
Vasoactive intestinal peptide tumours
(VIPoma) > watery diarrhoea
Because of their symptoms, these tumours are often
diagnosed in an earlier stage than functionally inactive
tumours. Although the majority of panNETs is spo-
radic, around 10% occur in the context of an endocrine
syndrome such as multiple endocrine neoplasia
(MEN-1), neurofibromatosis or tuberous sclerosis.
<!> ATTENTION
On cross-sectional dynamic imaging panNETs
typically appear as solid, hypervascular
tumours. However, it must be kept in mind that
they can also be of cystic appearance and that
they can be multiple.  Multiphasic contrast-
enhanced CT is considered the first choice
for imaging although multiphasic MRI is very
well suited to detect even very small panNENs.
Scintigraphy and 68-Ga DOTATATE–PET may be
used to localise small functional panNETs.

[Page 67]
<•>
/	 Neuroendocrine
Neoplasms
(panNENs
	/ PanNET: Insulinoma
<!> ATTENTION
Most (but not all) insulinomas
are hypervascular!
Multiphasic CT (pancreatic phase) shows a rounded, solid strongly enhancing mass in the pancreatic head (arrow). Portal phase shows decreased enhancement of
the mass (arrow), so-called “washout phenomenon”.

[Page 68]
<•>
/	 Neuroendocrine
Neoplasms
(panNENs
	/ MuItifocal Insulinoma of the Pancreatic Body and Tail
<!> ATTENTION
Insulinomas can be multifocal!
Insulinomas can be cystic!
MRI (axial T2-weighted images with fat saturation) shows multiple rounded, hyperintense lesions in the, body and tail of the pancreas (arrows)

[Page 69]
<•>
/	 Cystic Neoplasms
	/ Cystic Neoplasms of the Pancreas
True cystic pancreatic neoplasms are much
less common than pancreatic ductal adenocarci-
noma and include a variety of different entities.
Examples for benign lesions are serous microcys-
tic adenomas. Although mucinous cystic neoplasm
and the intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm
(IPNM) are also of benign origin, they are  poten-
tially malignant as they may undergo transfor-
mation into mucinous cystadenocarcinoma.
Although some cystic pancreatic neoplasms, e.g.,
serous microcystic adenomas or ductal IPMN
have characteristic imaging features, others may
be difficult to characterise  regarding their aetiol-
ogy. Follow-up and/or image-guided aspiration
biopsy may thus be needed because treatment
depends on precise lesion characterisation.
<!> ATTENTION
Because high resolution MRCP is
increasingly being used for biliary
conditions, ductal cystic lesions are
a common unexpected finding and
must be distinguished from potentially
malignant lesions. Follow-up of
ductal cysts >1cm is, therefore, often
recommended although guidelines
regarding follow-up may differ.

[Page 70]
>•<
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE
/	 Cystic Neoplasms
	/ Serous Microcystic Adenoma
Serous microcystic adenomas are benign
tumours which have a characteristic sponge-like
or ‘honeycomb’ structure with multiple fibrous
septa caused by small cysts. The size of indi-
vidual cysts is usually <10mm in diameter.
Serous adenomas contain a glycogen-rich, non-viscous
fluid without mucinous components which can be anal-
ysed by means of image-guided fine-needle aspiration.
<!> ATTENTION
Typical cross-sectional imaging
features include moderately enhancing
septa within a microcystic structure,
commonly including calcifications in
the central area. Despite their often-
considerable size these tumours do not
tend to displace or infiltrate the adjacent
anatomical structures. e.g., bile ducts or
vessels.